### Cartesian Product 

```sql
select * from movie, casting
```

###  Natural Join

```sql
select * from movie natural join casting 
```

It works by automatically identifying columns in both tables that share the same name and data type and performs an equality comparison. 

Suppose we have two tables 

1. User  -> (Name, Address, ProductID)
2. Product -> (ProductID, ProductName, Price)

Creating a natural join between them would result in the following result 
(Name, Address, ProductID, ProductName, Price) so it matches on ProductID and gets all the fields. 

### Theta Join 

```sql
select title from movie join casting on movie.producer = casting.name
```

we can even use `using` 
for example 

```sql
select title from movie join casting using (title, year)
```

is the same as above 

The difference between theta join and natural join is that, in theta join you specify the conditions on which the join should occur. 

*Note* : movie and casting are names of tables 

### Renaming relations 

you can rename a table when using in the where clause 

```sql
select * from consumer c maybe m where c.name == m.name
```

### Union Intersection Difference 

*Intersect*

```sql 
(select name, address from actor where gender = 'F') 
intersect 
(select name, address from actor where networth >= 10000)
```

There are also union intesect and except, which basically removes any duplicates, to preserve the duplicates use UnionAll, intersectAll, exceptAll

### More Joins 

1. Inner Join
	1. Returns a Tuple when there is at least one mathc in both relatons 
2. Left outer join 
	1. Like inner join but includes all tuples form the left relation even if there are no matches in the right relation 
3. Right Outer Join
	1. Id like inner join but includes all tuples from the right relation, even if there are no matches in the left relation. 
4. Full Outer Join 
	1. Basically inner join but includes all unmatched tuples from both relatons. 

*Note* Nulls are used for missing values 

The way we specify the type of join is as follows 

```sql 
L natural left join R 
L natural right join R 
L natural full join R 
```

To avoid duplicates we could use `Select distinct`, but this is a costly operation so should be mostly avoided. 

### Aggregation Functions 

select 
	count (`*`)
	sum(salary)
	avg (salary)
	min (age)
	max (age)

### Grouping 

We can group results by using the group by clause 

So if [[#Aggregation Functions]]  are usied in the projection list they are applied to each group 

```sql
SELECT Count(CustomerName), Country
FROM Customers
GROUP BY Country
```

### Filtering Groups by Aggregate functions 

we filter on groups by using  `having`

so for the above example we can modify it to

```sql 
SELECT Count(CustomerName), Country
FROM Customers
GROUP BY Country
HAVING COUNT(CustomerName) >= 10
```

### Subqueries 

#### Scalar Subquery 

A subquery that produces a single value 

```sql
SELECT title, 
	(
	select count(name)
	from casting 
	where (casting.title = movie.title) as numactors
	)
from movie; 
```


#### Set Subquery

A subquery that produces a set of distinct values (a single colunn). Typically used for set membership using operators *in* or *not in* or set comparisons using iperators *some(any)* or *all*.

```sql
select title 
from movie 
where studio in (select name from studio where address like 'C%')
```

we can even use (title, year) not in (select title, year ...)

```sql
select title 
from movie m1
where year < some(select year from move m2 where m2.title = m1.title)
```

*Note* Basically some is or and All is and. 

#### Relational Subquery 

A subquery that produces a relation. Typically used as an 
1. operaond of products joins unions, intersects, excepts.
2. operators exists or not exists to test if a relation is empty or not.
3. operators not unique or unique to test if a relation has duplicates or not. 

The *exists* and *not exists* functions with a subquery argument can be used to test wheter a relation is empty or not. 

The *not unique* function can be used to test wheter a relaton has duplicates or hasn't duplicates with *unique*. 

```sql 
select title 
from movie m1 
where not exists (
	select * from movie m2 
	where m2.title = m1.title and m2.year <> m1.year 
)
```


